When the judicial conscience is not persuaded by economic logic

In refusing to take up for review a bunch of five petitions concerning the inter se ranking of claims in the IBC distribution protocol, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has inadvertently sided with the status quo (Judgement here--> https://main.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2022/32268/32268_2022_6_1501_48032_Judgement_31-Oct-2023.pdf). To be sure, the Hon'ble Court did not dismiss the review petitions on merits of the arguments, but  on the scope of the review petitions.

The petitions sought a review of  the Supreme Court's  2022 judgement  in the Rainbow Papers case (Judgement here--> https://main.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2020/4574/4574_2020_5_1502_38016_Judgement_06-Sep-2022.pdf). The Hon'ble Court ordered   that the State is a secured creditor under the Gujarat Value Aded Tax 2003 (GVAT). The order held that the debts owed to the State under the GVAT Act. are to rank equally with other specified debts including debts.

It was a watershed judgement in the evolution of the IBC caselaw for at least two reasons:
(i) By putting Crown debts on a par to  with secured creditors, the judgement  attempted to overwrite the intention of Parliament  In line with the overall intention behind framing the law, and global precedents, the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. laid out  a specific  order of distribution of sale proceeds of assets of the bankrupt debtor;
(ii) The Rainbow Papers (2022) judgement failed to recognise the economic foundations of insolvency and bankruptcy laws. The world over, insolvency and bankruptcy laws are legislated outside the realm of civil laws to provide unassailable protection of creditor rights. Equally, such laws provide for a judicially supervised platform for the orderly and timely reslution/liquidation of stressed assets.  

The underlying idea of a judicially-supervised process was both to avoid a wild stampede of competing claims on the assets of a bankrupt debtor and to avoid discretionary favouritism at any point. If this were not to be the common law, creditors--secured or unsecured, financial or opertional--would write their individual lending contracts to provide for superior claims in event of a bankruptcy. The cost of credit for the corporate debtor would shoot to unsustainable levels. Availability  of credit at reasonable terms would be a mirage, Trade ad commerce would be paralysed.  Creditors needed protection from bankrupt debtors but also from each other in this Titanic-like situation..

The intention of Indian Parliament is very clearly enunciated in the preamble of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016::
"An Act to consolidate and amend the laws relating to reorganisaticontract separately.on and insolvency resolution of corporate persons, partnership firms and individuals in a time bound manner for maximisation of value of assets of such persons, to promote entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders **including alteration in the order of priority of payment of Government dues** (emphasis added)." 

Parliament codified the order of distribution of sale proceeds in Section 53(1) of the Code. The layered approach therein is also known as the 'Waterfall Mechanism.' Briefly, the first claim on the sale proceeds of the assets would be payment of costs of resolution/liquidation proceedings. At Level 2 were two class of claims with equal standing. these were:
(i) workmen's dues for the 24  months preceding the liquidation commencement date; and
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor in the event such secured creditor has relinquished security in the manner set out in section 52.
At level 3, were wages and any unpaid dues owed to employees other than workmen for the period of 12 months preceding the bankruptcy initiation; and at Level 4 stand financial debts owed to unsecured creditors.
At Level 5, stand the  amounts due to the Central and/ or  the State Government in respect of the whole or any part of the period of two years preceding the liquidation commencement date; which ranks equally with  debts owed to a secured creditor for any amount unpaid following the enforcement of security interest. Lower down are claims of preferred shareholders, at Level 6, and equity sharelders at Level 7.

Long story short: Parliament intended that all trade claims be satified before settlement of government dues at the fifth level. But the 2022 judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court  upgraded  government dues to Level 2, on a par with secured creditors. Perhaps the arguments of the learned counsel in the 2022 Rainbow apers case ailed to persuade the Hon'ble Court  on the economic roots of the waterfall mechanism. 

The conomic logic

TBH, it does sound a trifle odd that the State should stand at the bottom of the queue while workmen and secured creditors get the top billing. One argument that has often been thrown is that only a finite universe befits from the recovery for secured creditors or workmen.whereas  recovery for the State  benefits all citizenery. It is attractive logic, no doubt. Yet it fails on simple maths.  Top tier recovery for secured creditors prserves the pool of risk capital--to the maximum extent possible--whereas routing it through the government cofffers would mean a per head recovery in inverse proportion to the population. This is, of course, a very simplistic illustration, but you get the drift why early mercantile laws were designed for the  protection of  risk capital and workmens' interests. Capital was limited. Every effort had to be made to avoid instances that drained the pool of capital. 

Although the Babylonian Talmund had a detailed discussion on division of the estate of a bankrupt person, it was not until the 1500's  England that it was recognised that creditors rights had to be protected through special laws outside the common civil law. The first bankruptcy law passed in England in 1542,was titled "An Act against such persons who make bankrupts," explicitly recognising that since trade and commerce   survive on credit; a default in one link in the chain can have a cascading effect throughout the system.   

When multiple creditors are in the play, only templated laws can provide for unambiguous ranking of creditors' claims not only against the debtor but also among themselves. 

Over the last six centuries,  beginning with the first bankruptcy law in England in 1542, legal thought has been strongly influenced by economic logic in a two-way exchange of ideas. It has been well established  that  greater investor protection encourages the development of capital markets and that countries that better protect creditors have more developed credit markets.  Recent financial crises have further highlighted the importance of well- functioning insolvency systems to prevent and resolve corporate sector financial distress before such fault lines destabilise the country's banking systems and the whole economy.

It is in this context that all modern insolvency and bankruptcy laws have emphasises creditor protection as a primary (often undocumented, and yet obvious from the legislation). In India, the report of the Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee (2015: Chairperson TK Viswanathan) here-->https://ibbi.gov.in/uploads/resources/BLRCReportVol1_04112015.pdf==centered its recommendations on the "Key economic question in the bankruptcy process." It is a very illuminating read on the intent behind the draft code, which subsequently was refined by the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2015 (Chairperson: Mr. Bhupender Yadav). 

The Viswanathan Committee report's clear and unamiguous narrative highlights the primacy of preserving value in a stressed asset in the context of  creditor protection. 
<block quote>"(describe) creditors and debtors agreeing on a financial rearrangement to preserve the economic value of the business. In the conventional understanding, the enterprise in the above example (of debt default) would be treated as a failed business model‟ and be closed down. The value that could have been earned of keeping it as a going concern is lost. Through a financial rearrangement, the enterprise remains a going concern. [Para 3.2]  here-->https://ibbi.gov.in/uploads/resources/BLRCReportVol1_04112015.pdf

The Committee therefore argued for keeping "the right of the Central and State Government in the distribution waterfall in liquidation at a priority below the unsecured financial creditors in addition to all kinds of secured creditors for promoting the availability of credit and developing a market for unsecured financing (including the development of bond markets). In the long run, this would increase the availability of finance, reduce the cost of capital, promote entrepreneurship and lead to faster economic growth. [Section: Liquidation, page 13].

For good measure and to address the rather bold view, the Committee added: "The government also will be the beneficiary of this
process as economic growth will increase revenues. Further, efficiency enhancement and consequent greater value capture through the proposed insolvency regime will bring in additional gains to both the economy and the exchequer."

Later, the joint parliamentary committee (chairperson: Mr. Bhupendra Yadav), endorsed the Viswanathan's committee's draft, adding some level of protection for operational creditors (OC). here-->https://eparlib.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/762113/1/jcb_2016_insolvency_bankruptcy_bill.pdf.

Perhaps the arguments in the  Rainbow Papers case were not aqequately rooted in economic foundations. In the instant case, the Honble Supreme Court has denied a review citing lack of scope. A grave error in judicial reasoning will remain as precedent for all time. At a time when the efficiency of the IBC process is being called into question for the inordinate delays in resolution/liquidation and for the poor recovery metrics, a reordering of the priority of claims will do little to support the intentions set out in the preamble.
----------


The author is public policy analyst, not a lawyer. The views herein are personal.


tags: #Rainbowpapers #IBC2016 #IBC #waterfall mechanism #government dues #secured creditors


